Hello, everyone. Welcome once again to WordPress
Accessibility Day 2020. My name is Ahmed Kabir
Chaion, and I'm working as a business development
manager at weDevs. I'm also a regular contributor
to the making WordPress documentation, design,
polyglots, accessibility, hosting, community,
learn WordPress, and marketing. I will be your
host for this session. You're here for the 8
a.m UTC talk with Hidde de Vries. Please feel
free to add your questions to the YouTube chat,
and we'll answer those at the end. Your
content management system plays a decisive
part in creating accessible content suggest the
Authoring Tools Accessibility Guideline - ATAG.
Whenever a content designer creates content the
CMS could help with the accessibility of it.
For instance, when a designer drops in an image,
the CMS could point to the ideal text alternative
or calculate the consequences for color contrast.
In this talk, you will learn more about what ATAG
is and how, with ATAG in mind, CMSs can
personally assist content editors on their way
to a more accessible website. The speaker for this
talk, Hidde, is a web developer and accessibility
specialist at the W3C's Web Accessibility
Initiative, or WAI based in Rotterdam,
Netherlands. As part of the WAI guide project,
he works on the accessibility of authoring tools
like CMSs and website creators, and guidance
that supports the Web Content Accessibility
Guidelines - WCAG. He has over 10 years
of experience working as a freelance
front-end developer and accessibility person
for organizations like Mozilla and the Dutch
government. On his blog he writes regularly about
reusable components, CSS, and web accessibility.
Which brings to the session "Your CMS is an
accessibility assistant." Take it away, Hidde.
[Hidde] Hello, this is Hidde, and I'm here today to
talk about how your CMS could be seen as an
accessibility assistant, and how that can help
organizations, including maybe the clients, or the
users of a CMS. Very briefly about myself, I work
as an accessibility specialist at the W3C, the
World Wide Web consortium, where i worked at the
Web Accessibility Initiative. We have a website
which I'd like to plug. On our website there is
loads of information about web accessibility,
about planning, designing, developing, testing,
advocating, and training for web accessibility.
So many people don't know about all these
amazing resources that are on this website, um,
so I thought I'd mention it. But disclaimer I, I
do work on some of the content for this site. Now,
I focus mostly in my work on authoring tools. And
authoring tools, if you're not familiar with that
phrase, they are tools that create web content.
And with that, as probably won't surprise you,
they are also tools that can improve a lot of web
accessibility at once. That is a very exciting
prospect, I think, and I'll be talking a lot
today about how we can, can make that a reality.
How can we really employ authoring tools to, to
improve accessibility in, in many places at once.
Now, first let's look at a couple of examples
of authoring tools. We're talking about things
like WYSIWYG editors, course creators, learning
management systems, or anything that they use in
online education - very important in times of
COVID - content management systems, of course,
wikipedia, your "save as html" functionality,
social media, form generators, site builders.
Lots of these, these different things, all have
in common that they create content for the web,
or that they they provide some sort of interface
for their users to create something that will
ultimately live on the web. Now specifically
about CMSs - we're at WordPress Accessibility
Day - you can think of the authoring tool as the
CMS itself. And I imagine some people watching
this today work, work on WordPress core, or have
provided some patches for it, or maybe considering
contributing to WordPress, but others may
be working on plugins like form builders,
custom field managing stuff, things where you can
manage events, or social media, cookie banners,
even. Just anything that you can plug into a
website, and that will also create web content,
it will also be considered as an authoring
tool. When I talk about CMSs in this talk,
I very much also mean plugins and themes, as
well. Now, the web is meant to work for everyone.
That is a point that we take very seriously at the
W3C. This is a photograph of Sir Tim Berners-Lee,
the inventor of the web, who was at the
opening ceremony of the London Olympics
in 2012. And he made these four words appear.
"This is for everyone." Now I think and I haven't,
you know, I haven't checked this with him
personally, but I think you could interpret
this in various ways. One is that the web should
be available for, for everyone to, to kind of
get onto the web. So, of course you need to get a
cable subscription, or go to a library, and maybe
pay to use a computer. But, ultimately, the web
is available for everyone - this is for everyone.
Secondly, I think everyone can have a website
on the web, as well. You don't need to apply for
permit at your local government, or something
like that, or you know do, do something very
special. You need to have a web server, or rent
one, and you can put some HTML on there and make
it available on the URL. So, in that sense it's
also for everyone. And, and the third way that
you could read this, "this is for everyone" is as,
this is something that should work for everyone,
including people with disabilities. And that
is the definition that we use at, um, at WAI.
Making the web work for people with disabilities
is what web accessibility is about. We're,
we want to make sure that this is for everyone.
Now, to that extent at WAI, we have three web
standards that are about the accessibility of, of
web content, ultimately. Now, many people will be
familiar with the WCAG standard, which stands
for the web content accessibility guidelines,
but there's two more sets of guidelines, that are
very closely related, and that together really
create that picture of an accessible web. So there
is, uh, the web content accessibility guidelines
about web content itself, but what about the
software that people use to access web content?
Browsers, or user agents. There's a specific
center for that, the User Agent Accessibility
Guidelines - UAAG. And what about the software
that creates that content, authoring tools? And
for that we have the Authoring Tools Accessibility
Guidelines. So together, these three standards,
they all say something about the accessibility
of web content. About the content itself,
about the software we use to view the content, and
about the software we use to create the content.
Now authoring tools are very important, and
CMS is with that. They're essential in this
picture of web accessibility. Because if we get
it right, if we get it right in authoring tools,
we'll be able to include more content creators.
We can have more people publish stuff on the web.
And the second reason that I think authoring
tools are so important and exciting,
is that content creators may be allowed
to fix accessibility problems before their
website goes live. It is the central central
theme of what I, what I want to say today.
Now the standard for authoring tools, as I said,
is ATAG. With the latest iteration ATAG 2.0.
Now, in ATAG, and I'll talk
about a lot of ATAG today,
but if you want to read it at your own pace you
can visit the source called "ATAG at a glance."
It's a page that has a bulleted list of the main
points that are in the ATAG standard. So that is
something you could review at your own pace. But
today we'll also go through a bunch of different
guidelines that are in ATAG - success criteria
- and I hope to give you a good overview of what
you can find in ATAG and how it can really help
end users and people who edit content on the web.
Now, the ATAG standard consists of two parts.
The first part is about the editing experience,
so the content editing itself, the, the backends
for example, and the second part is about the
output of content. I'll focus mostly on
output today, but also talk a bit about
what we can do to improve the editing
experience for people with disabilities.
Yeah, let's look at that first. So, part
A of ATAG is about the accessibility of
the editing experience. So the very
first success criteria, on A.1.1.1,
is about making sure that your interface conforms
to the WCAG standard. And part of that, of course,
is making sure that your interface works with text
zoom. It's something I heard a lot from users,
uh, when I talk to them for my work. It's
when they zoom in the interface they are,
it's not as easy for them to use the interface,
or sometimes the interface becomes completely
unusable. So testing with text zoom is one thing
you can do. Text alternatives for icons. It's
very common these days to have interfaces that
consist of just icons. So, if you work on the,
on a plugin, or a theme, or something that has
an editing interface where icons are the main
thing you click on, make sure that there are
text alternatives for them, so that there's an
accessible name somewhere in the source code. Make
it work with a keyboard is another great advice.
And that includes things like visible focus, so
that you can see, at all times, where you are on
the page, before you interact with something, and
that you can use all controls. So that includes
all form fields, anchors, and buttons. Another
recommendation in ATAG is about displaying
previews accessibly. Because most content
management systems, or authoring tools in general,
plugins as well, will have some way to
preview the content that you're working on.
And this material is about making sure that
that content is accessible, as well. Or you
can think of things like helping with spelling.
Some people may have dyslexia - they're editing
some content - you can help them a great
deal by helping them correct their spelling.
Now, that's a bit about the first part of
ATAG, improving the editing experience.
But what I really promised to talk about today is
how your CMS could be an accessibility assistant,
and, in that sense, support the production
of accessible content, as the official
name is for part b of ATAG. And for that, let's
talk a bit about what accessible content is.
It is things like that you have tables
with headers. That you have forms with the
appropriate labels. That you have hero images with
plenty of contrast. That videos are captioned.
That you can have multilingual content
with the right language attributes.
That everything is nested according to
specification. That carousels can pause,
and that you have sensible heading structure.
So all of these things, they contribute to,
to more accessible content. So for your end
users, for the people using the website or,
you know, web content that you're creating,
all these things need to be in order. So if
we want to have a good accessibility assistant, it
should assist with all of these different things.
And usually they could be different, different
products, right? Because sometimes you might have
a plug-in specifically for creating tables, or one
specifically for creating forms, so they could be
specialized products that focus on these specific
tasks. And an accessibility assistant would,
of course, help avoid inaccessible content. So it
would avoid things like tables with no headers,
it would avoid things like form fields
that have no names, illegible text,
caption-less videos, multilingual content
that doesn't have the right lang attributes,
non-standard nesting, carousels that don't have a
pause button, and headings for the wrong reasons.
So, a CMS that really helps you get
your accessibility right will, maybe,
warn you for these kinds of mistakes, or it will
generate markup that doesn't have these problems,
and, and provide templates that
comes with with the right stuff.
So that's what this is all about. We
want to avoid inaccessible content
for our end users ultimately, and we want to
help the people that are using our products,
like our CMS, or our plugin, or our theme. We
want to help them avoid inaccessible content,
so that they can ship a website that is
accessible and find problems before they ship it,
ideally. So a great CMS can really help content
managers make their content more accessible.
Think about things like when content is created,
it is accessible, which is the success criterion
1.1.2 - B.1.1.2 in, in the ATAG standard,
and that is about things like, you know,
you need to make sure that it's nested according
to the standard, you want to make sure there's no
empty links inside of this content. Sometimes,
to make content accessible, you need some more
information. So maybe you need to prompt the
user for required accessibility information, like
a caption for table, an alternative text for an
image, or for video, those sorts of things. You,
you need to prompt for, if you know that, that
could cause an accessibility problem. and,
you know, you rely on the content editor to
provide the information, you'll need to prompt
for it. So, uh, captions for tables, alt text for
images, and labels for form fields, are just some
examples of things that you could prompt for. Or
when content is generated, maybe there could be
automated accessibility checks. Or if it can only
be checked manually, maybe the tools could suggest
to the user to do a manual check. For instance,
if it's about the heading structure of the page,
or if it is about text alternatives, maybe
they are centrally managed, and you want the
user to make sure that the text alternative makes
sense for this specific use case. For instance a
photo of a speaker, but their name is also in the
content, so maybe at that point you would want a
zero, or you would want an empty alternative text,
rather than repeat the name of the speaker, so
that sort of thing, that requires a manual check.
Someone who knows the content and understands it
to, to go through it, and as an authoring
tool, as a CMS you could actually provide
the right instructions and help the the user to
figure out how to make their content accessible.
2.1.1 is about allowing to create accessible
content. So, not everyone realizes this, but there
are a lot of authoring tools out there that don't
provide, or don't allow for entering accessible
content. For instance, if you upload a video, if
there's no caption it isn't accessible - but if
your video widget doesn't have a caption button,
then you know the user cannot create an accessible
video with your authoring tool. Or if there's no
alternative text option. And some social media.
for instance. only recently added the option
to add alternative text. And there is a bunch
of social media out there that still don't have
that option available. So even if users want to
create accessible content, they are not able to,
because there's no option for alternative text.
So, for image fields, that means there
should be an alternative text field,
and for video players there should be an upload
button for captions. And this is specifically
important for those creating plugins that deal
with video or, or images. Make sure that people
can manage their alternative text, so that they
can create accessible content in the first place.
Something else that ATAG recommends is to have
accessible templates for the most common use
cases, and to be able to filter for that. Um,
I know there is a filter available in the,
in the WordPress directory of different
themes, so that is another important way
that you can help content editors make the
right decisions. And there's a B.2.5.1,
which says that you should provide accessible UI
components. Or, as the specification calls it,
"pre-authored content." So when you provide
something like a carousel, or, or tabs component,
and users can add that into the page, make sure
that they are accessible by default, so that the
content editor doesn't need to do anything - it
just ships as an accessible component. So it makes
a lot of sense to spend time on accessibility
if you provide something like a carousel tool,
because everyone is going to use your plugin
is going to have a more accessible website. So,
it's going to have a huge, a huge effect if
you spend that extra time on on accessibility,
for all of those end users, specifically.
So here's some interpretation of B.3.1.1
which is, why don't warn users when they introduce
a color contrast issue? Say you work at an agency,
and a designer has produced this beautiful header
with a dark photo of a black cat with white text
on top of it. It has perfect contrast, and it's
been checked according to the accessibility
guidelines. This is good, it passes all the tests,
but then someone decides to replace the photo
with one of Korean food, in this case. And it is
a perfectly valid photo - but it is very light,
and the text is also light, so at this point,
when we drop in this photo, we've introduced
a color contrast issue. And it's possible to
programmatically detect color contrast problems.
And with that, you could provide a warning for the
content author that something is going wrong here.
You could say, well, there's not enough contrast
- maybe there should be background color
painted behind this text to fix the problem, or in
some cases a larger text, or a bolder font could
be just enough to address the problem. Something
else that you could do is to add a spell checker
to content fields. I have a button here that says
"Swpmit," which, I guess for visual sighted users,
they might parse it in their head and see that it
probably says "submit," because the "w" looks so
much like a "u," but if you are trying to
use some assistive technology, it's going
to be pretty tricky to use this button, and it's
going to read it out weirdly in a screen reader.
If you use something like Naturally Speaking, it's
going to be hard to identify the specific button.
So if there was a spell checker, you could
avoid these accessibility problems altogether.
Something else that you could automatically do
is report readability levels. And I think I've
seen this in some SEO plugins, but it's also very
valid thing to do for accessibility, to make sure
that the text is nice and easy to read. And you
could have readability levels, uh, warn the user
when they've added text that's too complicated and
maybe help them fix the problems there, as well.
Something else that the standard recommends is
to provide accessible examples. So if you work
on documentation, you can do a great deal, as
well, about accessibility of your CMS or plugin
by making sure that all of the examples really
help the user to get their accessibility right.
Sometimes that means the stuff
that maybe gets copy/pasted,
really ensuring that everything there
is perfectly accessible. Sometimes,
it means providing the right guidelines.
Like, you know, if you leave this field empty,
there won't be alternative text, so make sure you
put something in there. Or explain, kind of, how
alternative text works. So it's really putting in
an extra mile and making sure that the example is,
is accessible and really encourages good
accessibility. So, basically, a good CMS can
encourage more accessible content and help
people get their accessibility right. Now,
I've talked about the standard quite a bit, but I
think one of the exciting things about authoring
tools that help with accessibility is that it can
really help with your process. Let's look now at
when, in the process, authoring tools can help.
Now process is a bit of a tricky subject, I think,
because whoever you talk to, depending on their
organization, they will have different ways of
organizing their projects. Now this is an example
of a process that your organization might be
following, if it follows the waterfall principles.
So you might start with some planning and strategy
sessions, and do interaction design and visual
design, then development and QA, then launch.
You might have a process that is much more
multidisciplinary, so you might have all the
disciplines working together in iterations,
and that could be a thing in sprints or doing
something like scrum. Um, or you might be going
back and forth between these phases. Like going
back from launch, to strategy, or to interaction
design, or sometimes maybe from QA to design.
Whatever you're doing, I think there is
a lot to say about where authoring tools
fit into the process. For instance, if
you're working in planning and strategy,
you can make a huge difference by choosing an
authoring tool that supports accessibility in
the ways that I outlined before. So adopting a lot
of the principles in ATAG, and really helping the,
the user to get their accessibility right, can
really help in the long run, because if that's
the case, then later on in the process, it'll
be much easier for the organization to create
webpages that are accessible. In the interaction
design phase, you could spend a great deal on how
content should be authored in an accessible
manner. You could test the authoring process
with people with disabilities, if user testing is
part of your your interaction design discipline.
If you're doing visual design, you could provide
guidelines for customizing color, so that contrast
works well. You could work on accessible examples,
like large enough touch targets. Uh, all these
sorts of things, uh, can help you in a design
phase, to make sure that anyone who's authoring,
uh, web pages later on, because you might not
be designing every single web page - it might
happen in the templating phase, and then content
people might work with designs that were created.
So providing some guidelines there can
really help in the authoring phase.
When we're talking about development, you could
make a great difference by picking a theme that
has accessibility support, or plug-in with
accessibility support. Because, again, you'll
help people who create web content to do that in
a more accessible manner, or sometimes get a lot
of accessibility for free, if there's a carousel
component or something that was built accessibly.
When it comes to QA, you could embed automated
accessibility tests in the authoring process.
So, for instance, if someone
creates a new page and presses save
that there are some tests that are
running automatically. If you have some
test automation engineers in your team, take
advantage of them, and let them help make the
authoring process more valuable as well in terms
of accessibility. And then, when you launch, you
may have something that is much more accessible
than if you wouldn't have done all those, those
things, uh, because many websites are launched
without much required for accessibility, sadly.
That still happens. And those websites might find
that they then hire accessibility consultants,
get a big list of issues that they never thought
of, and it might take them a lot more time to,
to work through all of those issues. So if you
start very much in the planning phase, and think
about accessibility in all of these different
phases - and I know that's not a new thing,
but I just want to say that that really makes
a big difference. And if you think of authoring
in all of these phases, that can really help
create much more accessible things by default.
Now it may be clear to you by now, that at WAI
we find authoring tools are really important part
of web accessibility. And to that extent we're,
you know, we're doing a number of things to, uh,
to improve the situation. The first thing is, um,
I just wanted to mention that if the ATAG standard
itself is a bit of a long read. There is also the
Implementing ATAG 2.0 document that has rationale
and intent for each of the success criteria, and
a bunch of different practical examples. And I've
taken some of the examples in this presentation
from there, as well. It helps to understand ATAG
a bit better, if you you get stuck in in the main
ATAG document. Now, something that I'm involved
with personally is something called the WAI
Guide project. And one thing that we're creating
as part of that, to help people use the authoring
process that I just outlined right, really putting
authoring tools at the front and center, to help
you get your accessibility right. We want to help
people find tools that support accessibility. So
we've created a list of authoring tools where you
can filter by ATAG criteria and find tools that
support accessibility. Now this is all still dummy
data that you can see here - it's not live yet.
But we are working on getting our first entries
into the list, and you know, if you create a
tool, uh, that you think qualifies for this,
and has accessibility support, and that meets one
or more of the ATAG criteria, do get in touch.
I'd be interested to, to hear from you. Um, at
the same time, we're also working on something
called the ATAG Report Tool, where you can report
on ATAG criteria. So you can fill in some details,
and then you go to each of the guidelines,
and then you will say whether it passes or
fails. And you can fill in some information
about each of them. Now this is kind of on an
optional basis, so each of these are optional. You
can fill in the ones that you want to showcase,
so if you particularly deal with one of
the criteria well, then you fill in those,
and maybe leave the others empty. Of course
we want to have as many criteria as possible,
that will also make it easier for people to
find your tool in our list, but yeah, we welcome
reports this way as well. In this tool, you
are able to create a report in JSON or HTML
and you can also publish that on your website to
showcase how well you meet ATAG. And, ultimately,
you would be able to create a listing in the
authoring tools list that we're working on.
At the moment there's not that connection yet,
because it's still in its early phases, bu,t
yeah. Very much interested to hearing
your feedback on this tool, as well.
Now, going to conclusions, uh, what I wanted to
share with you today is very much that CMSs are
essential for an accessible web. It won't surprise
you, as people who work on, on CMS's and plugins,
and maybe themes, even, but yeah, your work is
very important for website, web accessibility.
I hope this, this talk gave some more insights in
more ways that it, that it does. Now, secondly,
I think CMSs should really help content editors
get their accessibility right. And I open this
talk about, like, the number of ways in which
they, they can, so yeah. Hopefully, we can really
see our CMSs as accessibility assistants, um, and
that's the question I want to leave you with: How
would you turn your CMS, your plugin, your theme
into a better assistant for web accessibility?
For now, thanks very much for
listening. You can find the slides on
talks.hiddedevries.nl. It is also, it's
also going to have all the resources, links,
and video, ultimately, I think. Uh, if you have
any questions, feel free to get in touch. It's
hidde@w3.org, or you can reach out on Twitter.
Now I'm going to be showing off in a live Q and A
right after this, so then I want to just thank you
for listening, and shout out to the organizers of
WordPress Accessibility Day. Thanks so much for
putting this event on, and inviting me to speak.
[Ahmed] Thank you so much, Hidde, with that
presentation. We actually was able to learn
a lot of things that are very, very important to
choosing CMSs, and we have a bunch of questions.
So, let's just start with the first
one, while a few more comes in. So,
the first question we have for you is, "What would
be the most important feature you must change in
Gutenberg to be completely accessible? If you need
to correct something, you could also do that."
[Hidde] Yeah, so I'm probably not the right person
to ask, because I don't work on, on Gutenberg. I
think one very interesting presentation that would
get you up to date with the latest on Gutenberg
Accessibility is by Joe Dolson at the WordPress
Campus. The video of that has recently been
released, and I think that will give you a good
overview of the stuff that that team is working
on, sometimes struggling with, uh, sometimes
really massively improving. So there's, there's a
lot of work happening on uh, on Gutenberg, which I
think is great. It's hard to make a, an editor of
the future, and also do it accessibly, so I admire
the effort. I think it's, uh, there's lots of
great work happening there, but I don't have
too much to say about the actual issues there.
[Ahmed] Awesome. Next one is your suggestion
if you know of any good tool for developers
to test the different levels of accessibility - A,
AA, or triple A. [Hidde] Yeah, so, those levels,
they actually exist in multiple standards. So
most people will refer to them when they look
at the WCAG standard, that has these, these
three levels: A, double A, triple A. The ATAG
standard does as well. Now, for the UAAG standard,
there's a bunch of different automated test tools
that try to interpret the rules that are in WCAG
as test rules and, and run automatically. Um,
for, for ATAG those don't really, uh, don't
really exist. Uh, so at the W3C we have this
project called ACT rules, where we try to bring
different tool vendors together, and work on, uh,
test rules, harmonize those test rules, so that
every tool kind of interprets WCAG the same way.
Uh, I think that's an interesting project to watch
if you wanna, wanna know more about different
rules that exist. Um, but yeah, you can definitely
test automatically for WCAG - that is good for
if you're developing a CMS, because one of the
ATAG guidelines is conform to WCAG, so that's,
that's good for the editing experience, but it's
also good for, uh, for the output. So if you check
the the page that is being generated, or that the
editor is working on, if you run that through some
automated test tool, you might also be able to
prevent some accessibility issues. [Ahmed] Great.
So, the next question is one of my favorite,
and this one asks why are we all focusing on
WCAG and not also on ATAG - is there, uh, bias?
Is there a priority when we're choosing? [Hidde]
It's, it's a great question, um, and something we
noticed at WAI, as well, and, and kind of partly
the reason why I'm now assigned to, to work on
this. Uh, we would love more people to embrace
ATAG and show the benefit of embracing ATAG, not
just for people who make CMSs, or sell plugins,
but also for the companies that buy them.
We feel like there's a unique selling point
to be made because so many organizations
are now required by law to be accessible.
And if your tool can help them, you might be
able to charge them more money. So we feel like
there's a lot of benefit to, um, to looking
at ATAG. It's not happening, or it wasn't
happening so much, we see more uptake in the
last year, and more people talking about it.
We heard, um, Susanna talk earlier about
the accessibility of authoring tools,
and we have this, this conference day today,
so there's more, uh, more talk about it,
and that is great. We see more people focus on
it. But I think one of the main reasons is that
WCAG is a standard that is embraced by so many
governments worldwide, and the one thing that
they, uh, put in, into legislation often. ATAG is,
is not, but it can really help to, to meet that
WCAG legislation. So I hope to have showed that
a bit in this talk, as well, that these things
can really play together. [Ahmed] Awesome.
Since we talked about the content management
system being an accessibility assistant,
the next few questions focuses on WordPress.
So, this is my personal question to you: how
ready do you think WordPress is, right now,
to serve as an accessibility assistant among
the CMSs that are out ther? [Hidde] Yeah,
so I look at a lot of different CMSs for, for my
work, and my work is vendor-neutral, so to say, so
I don't look too much at specifics. I do
know in WordPress there are things like,
um, good options for alternative
text for, for images, so there's,
uh, clear information on what you should do there,
I think that's very helpful. Um, there is also
something about color contrast, I remember?
That will, um, show you if you have the, the
wrong color contrast, and help you get it right.
Uh, I think those are, those are great features.
Um, I think there's a page structure thing, as
well, so there's, there's a bunch of things in
WordPress that really can help people get their
accessibility right. But also work to do. I think,
uh, people of the accessibility team, and
organizer of this, this event, will be more
up to date with, with the things that are still
being worked on. [Ahmed] Yeah, we can certainly
look towards the future. So, if you had to
rate WordPress as an accessibility assistant,
how would you rate it amongst a double A and
triple A - I know it can get controversial, but up
to you, if you want to make any comments. [Hidde]
I, I cannot possibly comment on that, because we
we look at all the different CMSs, and we want
everyone to, to meet as many criteria as possible.
Good thing to mention there is that, um, it's not
about meeting all of ATAG, or being completely
compliant. Just like with WCAG, that is pretty
hard to do, and not many organizations do it.
Um, and they have to, by law, but you know
it's a continuous process. And one person
updates one image, it could be inaccessible. The
point is really to meet as many of these criteria
as possible, and, um, you know every, every little
bit really, really helps. And we see that a lot,
that organizations are, are doing that. And
also that CMSs are making small improvements,
and they are all helpful, and the end users
will, will be happy with these huge improvements,
I think. [Ahmed] Uh, I must admit, Hidde, that
our talk is certainly sparking a little bit of
conversation in the chat feed, we're getting a
few more questions as we speak. We have time,
so the next question is on Craft CMS.
Is Craft CMS much better than WordPress
in terms of the accessibility of the editor,
thoughts? [Hidde] Are you referring to the
W3C choice of, uh, of CMS? [Ahmed] I suppose
so, I suppose that's the question. [Hidde] Uh,
so I'd really like to refer to the the blog post
I've already published about this, because, um, I
had a tiny part in, in discussing this internally,
of course. Um, the main, the main points are we,
we found not many, um, not many tools meet all
of our criteria that we need, and that's a lot
of different criteria. So we, we need an
accessible CMS, we need a CMS that supports
internationalization, because we
work with the global community,
um, bunch of different things, basically,
that we've decided our CMS choice based on.
Accessibility was, was one of them, and in my work
I really tried to convince other organizations to
do what we did - make accessibility part of that
choice, because, uh, it's going to help you in the
process, like I showed in the slides. Um, they did
that, so the, the vendor that we hired for the,
the new website they, they looked at these
different, um, aspects and also at accessibility,
uh, and they looked at how they, how they feel
it is going to improve. And that is, you know,
that's a different, difficult thing to, uh,
to assess. Because, you know, you cannot look
into the future. Um, but yeah, it seems like,
like for them that the, the Craft CMS had, had
more commitment, uh maybe also from the top, to,
uh, to make their accessibility features better.
Um, but yeah, maybe WordPress will be a better
choice for other organizations. It's really tricky
to, uh, to say, and I can't comment in too much
detail about that. [Ahmed] That's fair enough. Uh,
then, I, I think I can understand where
you're coming from. So, uh, such forum, when,
where we discuss and we try to assess, uh, CMSs,
if they're accessibility-ready, so such questions
are quite realistic, I suppose. But then again, I
request you to go through our website and answer
the question. I'm sure you will be given the link
later, also viewers, we've also shared the slides
to the presentation by Hidde. Before, I can ask
you the last question. So, the last one says:
Have you tried to use ACF and a headless front-end
as editor to get accessibility content creation?
[Hidde] Yes. Not in my capacity at the W3C, but
I do have from personal experience with that.
Something in general you can say about, um,
so, so ACF is an Advanced Custom Field, right,
so you define your own fields. Um, and what's
interesting about that, is that you could have
just strings of text that people put in, and
then you can invent your own markup around that,
so you control all of the accessibility. Uh, you
could do it badly, and you could do it greatly,
right. So, like I mentioned, some CMSs don't
have the option to add captions to a video.
Um, if you create your own fields, then you can
create a field for captions, so you can really
control that, uh yourself, and then make it
more of an accessibility assistant in a way,
as well, because you could explain why
they need captions, do it in a way that is
the perfect tone of voice, and that will
inspire people to do it, rather than,
uh, make them annoyed. Because I saw
someone asked like, you know, how can we,
uh, avoid that people choose a different CMS if
we confront them with accessibility too much. Uh,
so yeah we have that positive tone of voice. So
that's something you can really control, if you
define your own fields. Uh, so yeah, that's uh, if
you are, uh, an integrator with, with WordPress,
and I think that makes a lot of sense to, to try
and find your own fields, and get full control
over, over what these fields look like and what
they say. [Ahmed] Thank you so much, Hidde, with
your time, your effort, and patience with
the questions. Um, before we can wrap up,
I would like to ask you one personal question:
How would you like the stakeholders out there,
who can make a difference to initiatives such as
WordPress Accessibility Day, we know this is only
happening for the first time, uh, what if you
had a, um, had a platform, if you had a voice,
what would your message be out there for the
people who can make the difference? [Hidde] Uh,
the difference in choosing, making, [Ahmed] making
such initiatives better and more accessible.
[Hidde] Uh, like the today's event or... [Ahmed]
Today's event, yes. Yes, thank you. [Hidde]
That's a tricky one. I, I don't know. I mean
there's, uh, there's captions, um, so that's,
that's good. Uh, I don't know. I haven't looked
too much in, into the accessibility aspects of
today's event. [Ahmed] I'm sure we will
have your support for the future, so
on that note, we come to the end of this session,
um, your CMS is an Accessibility Assistant. I want
to personally thank Hidde for being patient
enough, and answering all the questions,
um, also I want to give a huge shout out to
Harish, who has been acting as the moderator
for this session, posting the questions on our
site. Also, I would like to give a huge shout
out to the session manager, Stefano. working in
the background. So I also would like to thank
everyone for attending with Hidde and myself. You
can continue the conversation using hashtag WPAD,
hashtag WPAD2020 add the at of @wpaccessibility.
Don't forget to attend the next talk:
If it's true, it ain't bragging: choosing a CMS
for accessibility", with Mitchell Evan and myself,
right at 9:00 am UTC, here in the same time. Until
that happens, see you right here after the break.
Thank you so much, Hidde. Bye bye!
[Hidde] Thanks so much for having me!